hey it's me destin welcome back to
smarter every day this is a lunar lander
that's a different series we're starting
on smarter every day
this is a nuclear submarine we are now
really far
into the nuclear submarine deep dive
here on smarter every day and today
we're going to answer a question that
i've always wanted to know submarines
are designed to stay underwater as long
as possible and sometimes they can't
even go to the surface if they want to
like right now the uss toledo is
currently under the ice which makes it
impossible to surface to get fresh air
how do you create oxygen on board a
submarine because if you think about it
if you're on board with a lot of your
crewmates and we're taking in oxygen and
we're breathing out carbon dioxide
eventually the atmosphere on the inside
of the submarine is going to become
soured so today on smarter every day we
are going to investigate
how to create oxygen onboard a submarine
and how to remove carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere
and we're going to have two ways to do
both let's get on board the toledo
and let's understand how to create
breathable air
on a submarine let's go get smarter
every day
[Music]
okay so in order to keep people alive on
the boat we have to have an atmosphere
at each location where each body is that
can keep that one body alive right
so ventilation is key if you have
different compartments that can be
closed at different times on boats for
different reasons for example a huge
pileup of people in the place where
everybody sleeps you're going to be
creating a lot more carbon dioxide in
that location than other places on the
boat
but we have to keep the entire
atmosphere livable throughout the boat
so in order to do this they monitor
the atmosphere of every position in the
boat that's important with a system
called
cams the central atmospheric monitoring
system
so the first thing we're going to do is
go figure out how to measure the
atmosphere
at any place in the boat and then we'll
address how we deal with it with carbon
dioxide or oxygen or whatever anyway
let's go check out cams i'm destin i'm
dell dal i'm going how do you spell that
d.o.w d.o.w dow jones awesome man where
are you from
i'm from ohio hello what's up cool man
nice to meet you
yeah so so what did what do you do up
here so uh sharon well
i'm a machinist man auxiliary or anger
they're basically mechanical hold though
practically on the boat so where are you
monitoring the oxygen levels
so to mark the oxygen levels uh some cup
of middle level
called cams yeah central atmosphere
monitoring station
and uh we have a couple watching the
monitors auction levels on there can you
show me that
yes yep let me get around you
we're gonna see where the oxygen gets
monitored yeah
so this is in the middle of the boat yes
and uh it has different stations we can
monitor
and take samples of the air to monitor
our atmospheres
so right now you're looking at how much
o2 is on the boat yes carbon monoxide
i'm really glad that there's not any
there r114 so that's refrigerant yes
yeah so you're monitoring that as well
basically monitoring the
good gases and the bad gases basically
gotcha and so
you've got co2 hydrogen nitrogen water
that's cool and so this is the total
pressure on the boat it is
that's cool well in each compartment it
is
like like i'm saying we have different
can you show me yeah
it's like we take different uh sample
like sampling uh panel index
we can turn the dial to different
stations so right now you're looking at
the fan range yes
so if you wanted to go what what's okay
to look at
it's got a cheap power supporters
and so this is updated so it takes a
second so this bar has to go
all the way across for an update yeah
kind of slow but
so clearly you have some type of
you have some type of alarm that has to
oh yeah yeah if
oxygen gets too high or if it gets too
high or something gets too low
it'll alarm it'll make a beeping sound
so in the event that we have a bad gas
that you know we have a leak of
refrigerant for example
do you have a way of finding the leak so
i guess you could go to the panel
and then you could select different
sources and you can see where it's high
yes and so that isolates it to that
section of the boat right yes
but then how do you find the actual leak
like if it comes down to a pipe how do
you find
the leak on the pipe so for like uh r134
we have uh
we call them sniffers and uh they detect
uh where r134 is coming out of the
piping or the plant and a little alarm
when uh it attacks it so is it like it
sounds like a geiger counter when you
get closer to it or something yeah
it does so can i see one yeah
this is how the sausage gets made right
here this is how you keep yourself alive
on a sub
okay they're like
i guess we'll just show him the oxygen
stuff and then i'm really excited about
this
here we
you know go sniper sniffer can we get
sniffers sure
okay step away
this is it yep so this is a universal
refrigerant leak detector
so can you show me how to use it yeah so
this is what it looks like when we find
a leak
so that's how that's how you find the
leak yes and then we can also switch
to small medium large leaks so looking
for a small leak
uh put this small because we won't
detect it if it's large
you gotta have a large setting so we'll
go through i guess r134 right here
you'll go through and you just drag
you'll drag it through the piping
very slowly just like coloring in
kindergarten
basically yes do you have something like
this for each bad gas
we have a trigger kit it monitors a it
tests like
the sample the air they look like little
tubes get the brake and you have to pump
air through it it'll indicate if there's
that type of gas in here
i also have a so called the ph.d6
that tells us the lower the lower level
explosive limit
so like for hydrogen for example yeah so
you have a sniffer that does that
is this the air conditioning no this is
for the chilling freeze box hot people
get cold
oh really yes is it is that on the other
side of the wall or something
level so you got a chiller running up
yeah this is a refrigeration plant yeah
all right so the cam system taught us
that not only is it important to monitor
oxygen and carbon dioxide but any kind
of gases that might leak out into the
atmosphere and harm people
so the next thing i told you there are
two ways to create oxygen on the boat
right
so for the first way i got a little
excited i made a little 3d printed thing
we're gonna do a little experiment
we're gonna use electrolysis to create
oxygen
very excited about this here's how this
works you did this in like
sixth grade science or something like
that but you get two electrodes
and you put them up in the water and you
put electricity on one electrode and you
complete the circuit and of course
h2o breaks into hydrogen and oxygen
right
so this was my thinking when i got on
the boat well i'm on a submarine
there's sea water all around the
submarine i can just take in as much sea
water as i want
i have a nuclear reactor i can just put
electrodes
hook them up to the nuclear reactor and
then just put those in the sea water and
i can provide
oxygen for everybody on the boat i'm a
hero right
except i would have killed everybody on
the boat and that i do not want to do
that this is why
if you run just straight up electrolysis
on seawater
with salt in an nacl you will liberate
chlorine gas and hydrogen not oxygen and
hydrogen
and that's a really bad thing and that
kills people so we don't want to do that
before you run
electrolysis on seawater you must first
purify it and the way you do that is
through a filtration system
and also something called reverse
osmosis now
reverse osmosis is complicated and i
don't want to go into the the
great depths of that right now but
there's a lot of stuff on screen right
now
and that's kind of what happens
wonderful okay let's come back here
so electrolysis the way we're going to
do that is we have this
super pure reverse osmosified water
in our little contraption here but what
we're going to do is we're going to add
potassium
hydroxide and when we add that and then
we hook everything up to the nuclear
reactor
that potassium hydroxide acts like a
catalyst
and it more freely liberates the oxygen
and the hydrogen for water and guess
what you can breathe oxygen instead of
the chlorine dustin was going to try to
pump into the sub
that's how that works look at how big
the difference is here on the left we
did electrolysis on salt
water you can see we ended up with
hydrogen and chlorine gas which actually
damaged the container on the right we
did it with purified water using
potassium hydroxide as an electrolyte
and that broke it down into hydrogen and
oxygen which is fine for the crew to
breathe
you make oxygen by electrolysis up up
near the newt
is that what is that that's the aog
automated electro
automated automatic electrolytic
oxygen generator uh-huh and uh we use
uh water and chemical called koh or
potassium hydroxide got it and we
essentially shock the water
which creates oxygen and so uh
takes water o2 or h2o
and splits it from hydrogen and oxygen
and we use oxygen
to breathe obviously right and then we
send the hydrogen overboard
okay so i told you there were two
methods to create oxygen on a submarine
right the first method is electrolysis
which i knew about
the second method was a little bit
counterintuitive to me this is a match
burning and as you know from high school
chemistry burning
means oxidation meaning it is taking
oxygen
out of the atmosphere and creating a
chemical reaction
so right now this candle is now burning
meaning it's oxidizing so when i heard
someone on the boat say
hey we're low on oxygen we need to go
light a candle
that was counter intuitive to me and
what's about to go down oh we're about
to burn chloride candles
so make oxygen from the cans right over
there behind you
yep so you're gonna feel you're gonna
burn this
yeah so the way this works is the candle
itself is actually inside
this container and then we'll put them
in a basket like this one right here
yeah and the basket will go inside here
but we open this up
have a little striker up here
and on the tip of it is red phosphorus
so what we'll do is we'll have it go
through here and once the candles are in
we'll take this
push it down and twist it and that'll
light the candles
okay and it lights kind of like a
cigarette from what i've heard i've
never actually seen one late
um because we can't really leave the lid
open when we light them because that's a
class delta fire
and we can't really put those out okay
but yeah that's really about it that's
it yeah okay and so and it makes oxygen
as you do it how long does it burn um so
each candle will burn for about
45 minutes to an hour so both candles
together they can burn somewhere between
90 minutes to
two hours really yes okay so you're
gonna burn two at one time yes
and so is this something you need to do
or something you're just doing
um we mostly need to do it right now
because our normal way of making oxygen
with the aog
um that's currently down so this is sort
of our backup method of creating oxygen
got it and so you're monitoring the
oxygen level back here
yeah right so so you're monitoring the
oxygen level here
and if it's low then you burn the candle
yep and that'll help bring the oxygen
levels back out to where we need to be
okay rock and roll
learning exo science
[Music]
so is this your job uh yeah this is one
of the extra things you do for our watch
so
um because one of my jobs is to actually
monitor the atmospheres
themselves so whenever i notice that
oxygen is getting low enough i would
have to make the
recommendations to burn the candles
and then if the chief of the watch
agrees then we'll burn the candles
and this right here is a byproduct after
we burn them okay
uh we call these clinkers honestly i
have no idea why we call them fingers
uh-huh
and so you're opening the can back there
sir
yeah can you can you show it to me
absolutely
[Music]
so this is the bottom of the camera let
me take off this protective cloth
uh-huh pretty much helps keep the candle
from being damaged while it's in the
can do you have a flashlight no i don't
have one on me
yeah flashlight perfect thank you
that's the top of the kettle so see
what's explaining to you about the
striker that ignites it
when the striker goes through the lid it
presses down on this center
piece here presses down on that yes and
the striker has a foster's tip
yes sir scandals can only be ignited due
to a chemical reaction between the
phosphorus and the chlorate of the
candle
the chlorate yes okay got it and so
that'll get it going yes sir
okay let me get out of your way here so
this is a pretty hazardous
activity then because it involves fire
on a submarine
yes yes sir
everyone's still one one classifier
knows what number somebody ever wants to
do the class delta fire because it's
self-oxidized plastic so it makes its
own oxygen
four and a half years of the next one
you've never seen this happening
[Music]
so you're just slowly getting down to
the chlorate yes sir
so two candles
we burn two candles at a time
so pretty much maximize that out oxygen
output of the
counter burns
[Music]
so this when you touch the end with red
phosphorus
starts burning slowly burns becomes this
yes this is the striker we actually use
just a nine inch nail
and this is the red phosphorus we're
talking about gotcha
all right sorry for this part here i am
going to step back a little bit because
i probably pulled the old candles out
and those are extremely hot
yes sir which is why we got these
protective gloves
so you're putting it in there and let it
cool off so um here it's
pretty close to it you can just feel how
hot it is just like put your hand
right by it actually cook yeah
definitely don't touch that don't touch
it
okay um yes when these actually burn
they end up burning with i believe it
was not 500 btus
yeah but they get extremely hot i
igniter press it through the lid
[Music]
let me hold it so we'd have a premature
ignition can i come over here
so you're about to ignite it oh
you are i am you are
now if you just grab i could tell the
like for you
if you grab the igniter press down and
twist okay you hold the light right on
it
so push it down push down press it down
and just
twist it like that just pass it just
[Music]
uh pull up on it i see the smoke
so
if you feel right here you go you can
feel the pressure coming out of this
pipe
yeah and that is tells us that's where
the oxygen is coming out yes sir
and that's what tells us that the candle
is ignited properly really
yes sir so you're making oxygen now
right now
you are a creator of oxygen okay it was
until i got off the sub when i totally
understood what was going on here but
the two main chemicals
in this candle were iron and sodium
chlorate
when you burn iron that's adding oxygen
to the iron and you're creating iron
oxide you're actually creating
heat that's the burning of the candle
but when you do that there's also sodium
chlorate
in the candle and that heat from the
iron oxide
is liberating oxygen from the sodium
chlorate and in doing so you actually
get more oxygen from the chemical
reaction now this is why this is
important
if you think about it if you're on the
submarine and we had
the nuclear reactor hooked up to the
electrodes right or whatever
that's great and you can just create as
much oxygen as you want through
electrolysis however
if you ever lose power for whatever
reason you can just light a candle and
that requires
no electricity whatsoever as long as you
have a solid candle
and a way to contain the fire without it
damaging anything on the boat
you can start that fire and create
oxygen with no
external power source whatsoever the
beauty of this oxygen candle oxygen
generation technique is that
the solid oxygen candle is in a very
small volume
but it can create a tremendous amount of
gas this is very important for things
like
spacecraft americans and russians have
used oxygen candles in space for years
and only one time did it get out of
control on the space station mirror
oxygen candles are amazing they're an
effective efficient way to create oxygen
onboard a submarine
how often do you burn these things uh
typically when we have to buy candles we
do we light two candles every two hours
once in a fork apartment and once in the
engine room
yeah you alternate every two hours and
you're constantly monitoring how much
oxygen is yes that's his job to monitor
the cams
our citroen atmosphere monitoring system
to verify auction double show off the
ship
okay and so can you literally watch the
uh the oxygen
level rise here um no it won't rise up
instantaneously like that because
it burns over time yeah so with that
what we'll see
is the o2 tour right here might go up by
three or four by the end of an hour or
so
and then what we'll do is we'll take the
pressure right here and the o2 torque
because the other that's partial
pressure yeah that's a partial pressure
so we can figure out the option
percentage of that
so it usually doesn't change too much
when we burn the candles because as
they're burning
people are breathing still so it might
go up by a little bit
but it won't be like a huge drastic but
it's like a
it's like a continuously solving
equation you're just trying to like
maintain you're not trying to rise
yeah no we're not trying to really rise
with these we're mostly trying to
maintain a suitable atmosphere
so that we can breathe still that's
awesome all right great so we know how
to get oxygen in the submarine in our
environment now we've got candles and
electrolysis
but we still have the carbon dioxide
problem as we breathe out
we're creating carbon dioxide and we
have to do what's called scrubbing the
co2 from the atmosphere
so to do that there's two processes
we'll talk about the first one
involves a liquid chemical we have uh
two marquee bravo co2 scrubbers
right here right here uh so this is
what's letting us breathe
it is yeah so what these machines are
designed to do they take
carbon dioxide out of the air uh if you
take it it's around 370 cubic feet of
per minute
air goes through so you use this
chemical called mono ethanol amine
or say it slower monoethanol amine okay
or
call for short mba or amin and uh
where does it go in so air will come in
to here it comes down for the bedroom
like the cycle goes air will go in
from the blower it will suck it'll pull
in air in and go through the blower
tower
yeah and uh naming sprayed over top of
the air
and i'll absorbs all the co2 out of the
air and the air goes back
to the air purifier and then it gets it
gets us back out
so this is this is fresh air coming out
yes
and then from there uh from the lord
tower
aiming the rich amine because it uh
has co2 in it it gets pumped from the
amine pump
into the heat exchanger which is right
here
which basically preheats the amine
before the before gets to the boiler
stripper
and the boiler stripper it's under
pressure uh which causes
a higher pressure causes things to have
higher higher boiling temperature
yeah so now that we boil the aiming
and that removes the co2 it releases it
yes
so where does the co2 go so after there
uh
it gets into the compressor and gets
compressed to sea water depth so how
deep we
are and then we send it overboard what
do you mean compress the sea water depth
so
it goes out as liquid co2 comes out as
uh like gas co2 but
like different depths the pressure water
pressure is
higher so it gets set off that way so it
compresses it to
however deep we are and then pushes out
so it creates enough
pressure to push it out oh i got it the
water doesn't come back in
i see okay let's break this down dow
referred to the chemical being used as
monoethanol amine or mea
also known as amine a lot of submariners
spouses complain about the aiming smell
in their clothes
once they get back from being on tour
anyway this is a really interesting
substance
he referred to two adjectives to
describe amine he said rich amine and he
said lean amine
if you think about rich amine it's like
a fizzy
drink co2 or carbon dioxide is in
saturation
in the liquid lean amine is like a flat
coke
it has the ability to absorb co2 but
it's flat it doesn't possess any of the
co2 in it at that time right so it's
this ability to absorb
co2 that makes monoethanol amine so
fantastic i'm a visual learner so let's
take a look at this
dow said there are two main components
to this system first there's the
absorber tower and then there's the
boiler
stripper first air that has co2 in it is
blown
into the absorber tower where lean mea
is sprayed through that air
the reason it's sprayed is because that
increases the surface area between the
carbon dioxide in the air
and the lean amine and that maximizing
of the contact area promotes the
absorption of co2 into the lean mea
because the lean amine is flat and it
wants to be fizzy
it starts to absorb that carbon dioxide
out of the air and then it falls down to
the bottom of the absorber tower
where it pulls together in a rich state
meaning it has that co2
in solution i don't really understand
this part but dao said there's a
preheating function that happens before
it moves over to the boiler stripper but
once it's in the boiler
the temperature of the rich amine is
increased and the co2
boils off turning rich amine back into
lean amine
that co2 that then boiled off is
compressed like he said to whatever
pressure it takes to push it overboard
the deeper you are in the ocean the
higher the pressure has to be in order
to push it out the side of the submarine
once the co2 is compressed and pushed
overboard somehow in that process it's
turned into very fine bubbles so it
dissipates out into the sea water
without causing too much noise
that lean amine can then be used again
to be sprayed back over into the
absorber tower and the whole process
starts over again and this is the magic
of the whole thing the fact that you can
take that lean amine and then make it
rich
and then make it lean again is fantastic
because that means you don't have any
consumables on board and you can
continuously scrub
co2 from the air indefinitely that's a
really big deal when you're trying to be
underwater for an extended period of
time so this amine system
is critical for staying submerged in a
submarine
so mea is one way to get the carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere in the
submarine the other way you've probably
heard of before and that's lithium
hydroxide during the apollo 13
incident famously the astronauts had to
adapt the square lithium hydroxide
canisters from the command module
to the circular interface of the linear
module and the reason is they had
different lithium hydroxide canisters
which is basically just a way of
passing air through this lithium
hydroxide membrane or mesh or
whatever you want to call it basically
just a chemical once it's exposed it'll
take the co2
out of the air so lithium hydroxide is
used in a ton of different places
rebreathers for navy seals uh they take
the co2 out of the air when an astronaut
does an eva they use lithium hydroxide
in the spacesuit to get the co2
out of their spacesuit the beauty of
using lithium hydroxide to scrub co2
from the atmosphere
is just like the oxygen candle if the
power goes out
and you don't have a way of running your
mea system you can just
open these canisters even and just
sprinkle lithium hydroxide out on the
bunk
in the sailors like where they sleep and
as long as it's exposed to the air it
will scrub the co2
from the atmosphere it's a fantastic
passive means of getting co2
out of the atmosphere so you can survive
on board the submarine so in summary
how to breathe on a submarine you've got
to make oxygen and you've got to scrub
co2 the primary ways to do this for
oxygen electrolysis
and oxygen candles to scrub co2 it's
going to be monoethylene
amine and lithium hydroxide you do all
this just right in just the right
amounts
and you can breathe underwater on a
submarine this
episode of smarter everyday is sponsored
by raycon raycon is a company that makes
fantastic earbuds i've been running a
lot lately i have been
putting many many miles on the road
using raycons to listen to music
audiobooks
i love these things my favorite thing
though is there's a little bitty button
on the side of the earbud itself
and if you are running and you tap the
button it'll pause everything you're
listening to i know that sounds like a
little deal but it's a big deal when
you're running
and a lady comes up to you and she's got
a little dog you will say hi to the dog
or whatever
boom pause i can engage with a human i
can keep running
they're great this is my dog princess
booper snoot i just wanted you to see
her she's cute
she's great i love my raycons if you
want to check these out
you can get them by going to
buyrecon.com smarter that gets you 15
off any order you want there's two
different models that i recommend
there's the everyday e25 and the
performer e55
this is the performer e55 the cool thing
about the performer
is that you have wireless charging as an
option you also have a usbc charging
option
but the way it works is you basically
put the earbuds
in the case here and the case itself
charges the earbuds they're fantastic
they are like half the price of other
premium audio brands but they sound
just as good if you go to buy rakon.com
smarter
pick out any color you want when you get
raycons they come with
all these little adapters so you can
tune the raycon earbud to your specific
ear hole size
it's like an adapter for whatever you
know what i'm trying to say
they're great you'll find the perfect
ear hole fit for you
yeah buy rakon.com smarter 15 off your
order i highly recommend them
there you go so here's where we're at in
the
smarter everyday deep dive series into
submarines we've learned about all this
stuff there's a ton
of things we've talked about food we've
talked about oxygen now
we've talked about all this stuff we are
coming up on
surfacing the submarine which is
fantastic so
if you're interested in subscribing to
smarter every day that'd be amazing i
would greatly appreciate it if not
no big deal i'm just grateful that
you're along for the ride literally so
thank you so much for watching smarter
every day i'm grateful
uh feel free to consider supporting on
patreon if that's your sort of thing if
not
also no big deal anyway that's it i'm
destined i hope you're getting smarter
every day
have a good one bye so you and dal were
together yes
in the same division okay yeah i figured
out pretty quick you
you're the guys that keep things going
on the ship i like to believe so
the backbone of the submarine if you
will what was your name sir freddie also
watson
pleasure to meet you mr watson listen to
me yeah and you sir i might test you
farmer
pleasure to meet you thanks appreciate
it so
here's where the auction's going out oh
it's getting hotter too yeah yeah i
guess
quick thank you you're really smart
thanks yeah
where did you learn all this just join
the navy yeah i mean i learned like
mechanical stuff
from my grandpa and stuff my dad and you
just you just came into the navy and you
learned all kinds of stuff yeah
especially the submarine force they
teach you a lot you have to learn a lot
because your life depends on it
really something goes down we're the
ones that have to fix it there's no one
else out here to help us
what's up bros it's pretty legit
thank you very much what's your name
again uh pedestrian dao
thank you